---
title:  "About"
date:   2017-12-11 10:05:00 +01:00
menu:
  main:
    title: "About"
    name: "About"
    weight: 10
---

I use computers for fun and profit. In my spare time, I participate in the Free
and open-source software community.

## Projects

I wrote and maintain the Linux tiling window manager [i3](https://i3wm.org/)
since 2009.

Shortly thereafter, I started focusing on projects in Go, [my favorite
programming language](/posts/2017-08-19-golang_favorite/). Notable Go projects
of mine are the code search engine [Debian Code
Search](https://codesearch.debian.net/), and the Go appliance platform
[gokrazy](https://gokrazy.org/), on top of which I implemented
[router7](https://router7.org), a small home internet router.

Sometimes I dabble in electronics: many people know me from the
[kinT](/posts/2020-07-09-kint-kinesis-keyboard-controller/) replacement keyboard
controller for Kinesis Advantage ergonomic keyboards, which allows you to run
the QMK Open Source Firmware. During the pandemic, I [made my doorbell intercom
smarter with MQTT](/posts/2021-03-13-smart-intercom-backpack/).

I used to be a [Debian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debian) Linux Developer,
but these days I have [effectively
retired](/posts/2019-03-10-debian-winding-down/), aside from keeping services
running. Instead, I like to publish [Linux distribution research on the topic of
fast package management](/posts/tags/distri/).

My early adoptions are IPv6 and HiDPI, so I contributed patches to numerous
programs (chromium, apt, radvd, vsftpd, etc.)

## Talks

I sometimes give [talks](/talks).

## Contact

To email me, replace the first dot with an @ symbol in this site’s domain.

If you want to say thank you, feel free to [buy me a
coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/stapelberg) :)

If you’re curious about the software behind this blog: It’s
[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/), a static site generator written in Go, with a custom
theme developed from scratch. Please don’t steal my custom theme, it was a lot
of work! Choose one of the [many great Hugo
templates](https://themes.gohugo.io/) instead.

If you decide to GPG-encrypt your email, expect a delayed clear-text response.
